<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en"><head>

<meta charset="utf-8">
<meta name="generator" content="quarto-1.7.30">


<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0, user-scalable=yes">


<title>Minutes – PHUSE WG : Open-Source Metadata Documentation (OSDocuMeta)</title>
<style>
code{white-space: pre-wrap;}
span.smallcaps{font-variant: small-caps;}
div.columns{display: flex; gap: min(4vw, 1.5em);}
div.column{flex: auto; overflow-x: auto;}
div.hanging-indent{margin-left: 1.5em; text-indent: -1.5em;}
ul.task-list{list-style: none;}
ul.task-list li input[type="checkbox"] {
  width: 0.8em;
  margin: 0 0.8em 0.2em -1em; /* quarto-specific, see https://github.com/quarto-dev/quarto-cli/issues/4556 */ 
  vertical-align: middle;
}
</style>


<script src="site_libs/quarto-nav/quarto-nav.js"></script>
<script src="site_libs/quarto-nav/headroom.min.js"></script>
<script src="site_libs/clipboard/clipboard.min.js"></script>
<script src="site_libs/quarto-search/autocomplete.umd.js"></script>
<script src="site_libs/quarto-search/fuse.min.js"></script>
<script src="site_libs/quarto-search/quarto-search.js"></script>
<meta name="quarto:offset" content="./">
<script src="site_libs/quarto-html/quarto.js" type="module"></script>
<script src="site_libs/quarto-html/tabsets/tabsets.js" type="module"></script>
<script src="site_libs/quarto-html/popper.min.js"></script>
<script src="site_libs/quarto-html/tippy.umd.min.js"></script>
<script src="site_libs/quarto-html/anchor.min.js"></script>
<link href="site_libs/quarto-html/tippy.css" rel="stylesheet">
<link href="site_libs/quarto-html/quarto-syntax-highlighting-0815c480559380816a4d1ea211a47e91.css" rel="stylesheet" id="quarto-text-highlighting-styles">
<script src="site_libs/bootstrap/bootstrap.min.js"></script>
<link href="site_libs/bootstrap/bootstrap-icons.css" rel="stylesheet">
<link href="site_libs/bootstrap/bootstrap-30a95832f1a590d68ba27e5a35dd57c6.min.css" rel="stylesheet" append-hash="true" id="quarto-bootstrap" data-mode="light">
<script id="quarto-search-options" type="application/json">{
  "location": "navbar",
  "copy-button": false,
  "collapse-after": 3,
  "panel-placement": "end",
  "type": "overlay",
  "limit": 50,
  "keyboard-shortcut": [
    "f",
    "/",
    "s"
  ],
  "show-item-context": false,
  "language": {
    "search-no-results-text": "No results",
    "search-matching-documents-text": "matching documents",
    "search-copy-link-title": "Copy link to search",
    "search-hide-matches-text": "Hide additional matches",
    "search-more-match-text": "more match in this document",
    "search-more-matches-text": "more matches in this document",
    "search-clear-button-title": "Clear",
    "search-text-placeholder": "",
    "search-detached-cancel-button-title": "Cancel",
    "search-submit-button-title": "Submit",
    "search-label": "Search"
  }
}</script>


<link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css">
</head>

<body class="nav-fixed quarto-light">

<div id="quarto-search-results"></div>
  <header id="quarto-header" class="headroom fixed-top">
    <nav class="navbar navbar-expand-lg " data-bs-theme="dark">
      <div class="navbar-container container-fluid">
      <div class="navbar-brand-container mx-auto">
    <a class="navbar-brand" href="./index.html">
    <span class="navbar-title">PHUSE WG : Open-Source Metadata Documentation (OSDocuMeta)</span>
    </a>
  </div>
            <div id="quarto-search" class="" title="Search"></div>
          <button class="navbar-toggler" type="button" data-bs-toggle="collapse" data-bs-target="#navbarCollapse" aria-controls="navbarCollapse" role="menu" aria-expanded="false" aria-label="Toggle navigation" onclick="if (window.quartoToggleHeadroom) { window.quartoToggleHeadroom(); }">
  <span class="navbar-toggler-icon"></span>
</button>
          <div class="collapse navbar-collapse" id="navbarCollapse">
            <ul class="navbar-nav navbar-nav-scroll me-auto">
  <li class="nav-item">
    <a class="nav-link" href="./index.html"> 
<span class="menu-text">Home</span></a>
  </li>  
  <li class="nav-item">
    <a class="nav-link active" href="./minutes.html" aria-current="page"> 
<span class="menu-text">Minutes</span></a>
  </li>  
  <li class="nav-item">
    <a class="nav-link" href="./references/problem_statement.html"> 
<span class="menu-text">Problem Statement</span></a>
  </li>  
  <li class="nav-item">
    <a class="nav-link" href="./aboutus.html"> 
<span class="menu-text">About Us</span></a>
  </li>  
</ul>
          </div> <!-- /navcollapse -->
            <div class="quarto-navbar-tools">
</div>
      </div> <!-- /container-fluid -->
    </nav>
</header>
<!-- content -->
<div id="quarto-content" class="quarto-container page-columns page-rows-contents page-layout-article page-navbar">
<!-- sidebar -->
<!-- margin-sidebar -->
    <div id="quarto-margin-sidebar" class="sidebar margin-sidebar">
        <nav id="TOC" role="doc-toc" class="toc-active">
    <h2 id="toc-title">On this page</h2>
   
  <ul>
  <li><a href="#sep2024" id="toc-sep2024" class="nav-link active" data-scroll-target="#sep2024">04Sep2024</a></li>
  <li><a href="#sep2024-1" id="toc-sep2024-1" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#sep2024-1">18Sep2024</a></li>
  <li><a href="#oct2024" id="toc-oct2024" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#oct2024">16Oct2024</a></li>
  <li><a href="#nov2024" id="toc-nov2024" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#nov2024">13Nov2024</a></li>
  <li><a href="#nov2024-1" id="toc-nov2024-1" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#nov2024-1">27Nov2024</a></li>
  <li><a href="#dec2024" id="toc-dec2024" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#dec2024">11Dec2024</a></li>
  <li><a href="#jan2025" id="toc-jan2025" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#jan2025">08Jan2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#jan2025-1" id="toc-jan2025-1" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#jan2025-1">22Jan2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#feb2025" id="toc-feb2025" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#feb2025">05Feb2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#feb2025-1" id="toc-feb2025-1" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#feb2025-1">19Feb2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#mar2025" id="toc-mar2025" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#mar2025">19Mar2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#apr2025" id="toc-apr2025" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#apr2025">16Apr2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#apr2025-1" id="toc-apr2025-1" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#apr2025-1">30Apr2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#may2025" id="toc-may2025" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#may2025">14May2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#may2025-1" id="toc-may2025-1" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#may2025-1">28May2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#jun2025" id="toc-jun2025" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#jun2025">11Jun2025</a></li>
  <li><a href="#jun2025-1" id="toc-jun2025-1" class="nav-link" data-scroll-target="#jun2025-1">25Jun2025</a></li>
  </ul>
<div class="quarto-other-links"><h2>Other Links</h2><ul><li><a href="https://github.com/phuse-org/OSDocuMeta"><i class="bi bi-link-45deg"></i>Github</a></li></ul></div></nav>
    </div>
<!-- main -->
<main class="content" id="quarto-document-content">

<header id="title-block-header" class="quarto-title-block default">
<div class="quarto-title">
<h1 class="title">Minutes</h1>
</div>



<div class="quarto-title-meta">

    
  
    
  </div>
  


</header>


<section id="sep2024" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="sep2024">04Sep2024</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Lovemore Gakava, Nicholas Masel, Steven Haesendonckx, Joel Laxamana, Hanming Tu<br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Joel Laxamana</p>
<section id="agenda" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda">Agenda :</h4>
<ol type="1">
<li>Introduce ourselves and what we want to get out of this WG.</li>
<li>Discuss and decide how we want to start this off and pick a template document we want to work with first (e.g.&nbsp;ADRG).</li>
<li>How we want to track our work (e.g.&nbsp;github project board - create issues and self-assign to the work we feel comfortable doing)</li>
<li>Frequency of our catch-ups to get status updates on work.</li>
<li>Discuss FDA quarterly meeting presentation :</li>
</ol>
<p>Hope this time works for you. If not, please let me know. First action is to create a set of slides to present at FDA quarterly meeting : 16 October at 14:00 BST. I was thinking we can create quarto md slides.</p>
</section>
<section id="discussionissuesactions" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="discussionissuesactions">Discussion/Issues/Actions :</h4>
<ol type="1">
<li>KO meeting 04Sep2024.</li>
<li>First draft of slides due 13Sep2024 (or sooner).</li>
</ol>
<ul>
<li>Intro : List out the current ADRG template we have now and how we want to update the template to include open-source metadata - Lovemore</li>
<li>Within the current ADRG from Pinnacle 21 vs an ADRG where Open-source submission was used, list out the differences and note these differecnes as the updates we want to make to the current ADRG template to be Open-Source friendly.
<ul>
<li>e.g., List out all of the tables in this ADRG, <a href="https://github.com/RConsortium/submissions-pilot3-adam-to-fda/blob/main/m5/datasets/rconsortiumpilot3/analysis/adam/datasets/adrg.pdf">here</a>, that we can automate and generate sourcing available metadata
<ul>
<li>1.2 Study Data Standards and Dictionary Inventory (Can this come from the TS SDTM domain?)</li>
<li>3.1 Core Variables (come from the define.xml specificaions)</li>
<li>4.2 Data Dependencies (may need to some code scraping to read through each ADaM program and identify any other ADaMs being sourced in to create the ADaM)</li>
<li>5.2 Analysis Datasets (read in all of the .xpts in the submission package to extract the metadata for each ADaM to fill in this table)</li>
<li>6.2 Issues Summary (extract report from P21)</li>
<li>7.2 ADaM Programs (read in all of the .xpts in the submission package to extract the list of ADaMs and it’s label for each ADaM to fill in this table)</li>
<li>7.3 Analysis Output Programs (this one may be tricky as there are many study specific Selection Criteria to include)</li>
<li>7.4 Proprietary R Packages (Joel has some code for this, in R, essentially using SessionInfo() and {renv})</li>
<li>eCTD structure.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
<li>With these listed updates we want to make, we can utilize metadata to help fill in this information in the ADRG (Let’s list write out specifications as to where )</li>
<li>Challenge the file format delivered to the FDA, not only .pdf, but can we additionally submit .qmd files (or other file formats) as well so that the ADRG can be reproduced on the Agency side to help better click on code from the ADRG to help execute. Note : <a href="https://www.fda.gov/media/85816/download">eCTD specifications</a> say we can submit .qmd for analysis, but can we also submit it as a form of ADRG documentation.</li>
<li>Do we want to bring up the possibility of creating an open-source package for this to help automate the use of metadata in the ADRG documentation.</li>
</ul>
<ol start="3" type="1">
<li>Review and Feedback due 20Sep2024.</li>
</ol>
<ul>
<li>Things to think about :
<ul>
<li>We want this template to be able to support multiple open-source languages. Currently, R is the go-to in Clinical Trial submission now in the industry for open-source. Do we want to create an ADRG based on R as first go or do we want to add the complexity of having to think about multiple open-source programming languages? It would be good to keep the template as simple and user-friendly as possible. Have a think offline.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="actions" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="actions">Actions:</h4>
<ol start="4" type="1">
<li>Update and finalize slides due 27Sep2024.</li>
<li>Practice presentation due TBD (anytime between 4 &amp; 6)</li>
<li>Present 16Oct2024</li>
</ol>
<ul>
<li><p>Nicholas Masel to</p>
<ul>
<li><p>find someone from CDISC as a POC for any questions we may have during this project.</p></li>
<li><p>add Steven H. from JnJ to this WG - Haesendonckx, Steven [JRDBE] <a href="mailto:shaesen2@ITS.JNJ.com" class="email">shaesen2@ITS.JNJ.com</a></p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Hanming to</p>
<ul>
<li><p>find out who from the FDA can get us invited to the next FDA quarterly meeting.</p></li>
<li><p>who will be the assigned FDA person(s) moving forward to collaborate with us on this project.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Joel to create base .qmd slides for FDA meeting.</p></li>
<li><p>All to contribute to the .qmd slides per the timelines above.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
<section id="sep2024-1" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="sep2024-1">18Sep2024</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Lovemore Gakava, Nicholas Masel, Steven Haesendonckx, Joel Laxamana, Hanming Tu<br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Joel Laxamana</p>
<section id="agenda-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-1">Agenda :</h4>
<ol type="1">
<li><p>Get google accounts from the team members to collaborate on google slides for FDA quarterly meeting presentation : <a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1LI8LmJDYTegKMLlJmVlH3iFEF9KO24gchKtM4X1DfG4/edit?usp=sharing">Enhancing Clinical Trials FDA Submission Documentation through the Power of Metadata - OSDocuMetaWG</a></p></li>
<li><p>We should connect with the PHUSE WG who created the ADRG templates initially.</p></li>
<li><p>We should connect with FDA, Paul and HyeSoo, YounKyeong to gain feedback on where they can see Open-Source documentation can go for FDA submissions.</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
<section id="discussionissuesactions-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="discussionissuesactions-1">Discussion/Issues/Actions :</h4>
<ol type="1">
<li><p>Ensure everyone has access to collaborate and edit the google slides by end of the week.</p></li>
<li><p>We need to draft these slides by the end of next week then send to team to review.</p></li>
<li><p>Finalize these slides by the end of the Month.</p></li>
<li><p>The slides have assignments on them so we know who is working on which content, but feel free to collaboarate on each others content as needed.</p></li>
<li><p>Joel to send email for bullet 3.</p></li>
<li><p>Lovemore to send email for bullet 2.</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
</section>
<section id="oct2024" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="oct2024">16Oct2024</h2>
<p><br>
<strong>Attendees:</strong> Lovemore Gakava, Nicholas Masel, Steven Haesendonckx, Joel Laxamana<br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Joel Laxamana</p>
<section id="agenda-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-2"><strong>Agenda:</strong></h4>
<ol type="1">
<li><p>Announcement :</p>
<ul>
<li>Presented at PHUSE/FDA Quarterly meeting today. See ‘Home’ page for presentation slides.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Feedback from team on ADRG Template Updates and Process - PHUSE/FDA Quarterly meeting presentation.</p>
<ul>
<li><p><a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1C3DNZaGuEiQYqKlocLPuNDgUoOVAGbpI/view?usp=drive_link">Pre-recording</a></p></li>
<li><p><a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/102NiwqffXKVK5v83kc--MMdEnYsDIZJ4/edit?usp=drive_link&amp;ouid=103991081896680964420&amp;rtpof=true&amp;sd=true">Slides</a></p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Coordination and Feedback from Key Stakeholders</p></li>
<li><p>Future Meetings and Next Steps</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
<section id="discussionissuesactions-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="discussionissuesactions-2"><strong>Discussion/Issues/Actions :</strong></h4>
<section id="feedback-on-adrg-template-updates-and-process" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="feedback-on-adrg-template-updates-and-process"><strong>Feedback on ADRG Template Updates and Process:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Feedback from Team Members:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Presentation went well.</p></li>
<li><p>The team is awaiting feedback from a key colleague from Pfizer, Christine Rossin who has a stake in updating the ADRG.</p></li>
<li><p>The necessity of ensuring the ADRG updates align with the expectations of stakeholders. For our first delivery do we want to include everything we mentioned in our slides or piece-meal our work and deliver in iterative approaches with timelines for each milestone?</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="external-feedback" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="external-feedback"><strong>External Feedback:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p>Plan to check in with Mike Stackhouse to get his input after he reviews the meeting recording.</p></li>
<li><p>Need to get insights from an FDA contact (Nick’s mention) if they were on this morning’s PHUSE/FDA Quarterly call.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="coordination-and-feedback-from-key-stakeholders" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="coordination-and-feedback-from-key-stakeholders"><strong>Coordination and Feedback from Key Stakeholders:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>David Epstein’s Role:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li>David Epstein, involved with ADRG template work in the past, might provide valuable input and help engage more contributors.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Communication with David planned post-meeting to gather and facilitate feedback, potentially via GitHub or alternative platforms for those without GitHub accounts.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="future-communications" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="future-communications"><strong>Future Communications:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p>Follow-up emails post-meeting to ensure any unanswered questions are collected and addressed.</p></li>
<li><p>Nick will check for additional FDA members interested in the ADRG updates during the upcoming PHUSE meeting.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="enhancements-and-tools" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="enhancements-and-tools"><strong>Enhancements and Tools:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p>Discussed creating a tool and an R package to bring in metadata effectively.</p></li>
<li><p>Importance of standardizing the ADRG template for future open-source submissions to drive consistency and efficiency in the industry.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="future-meetings-and-next-steps" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="future-meetings-and-next-steps"><strong>Future Meetings and Next Steps:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Internal Coordination:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Plan to migrate ADRG quarto markdown file to the PHUSE git area to continue work on this.</p></li>
<li><p>Testing the reproduction of the ADRG with metadata approaches. See List of other Metadata Opportunities slide in presentation.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Timeline and Deliverables:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Aim to schedule the next working group kickoff by mid-November.</p></li>
<li><p>Assignments on updating ADRG to be determined.</p></li>
<li><p>Emphasis on clear planning and setting deliverable dates.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Communication Plans:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Regular updates and feedback sessions to ensure all members are aligned.</p></li>
<li><p>Initiatives to include new members from upcoming meetings and engagements.</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="action-items" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="action-items"><strong>Action Items:</strong></h5>
<ol type="1">
<li><p><strong>Follow-Up with Key Contacts:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Nicholas to follow up with Mike Stackhouse as well as others in the PHUSE meeting this coming Friday, 18Oct2024, regarding any further feedback or points to consider before we begin work.</p></li>
<li><p>Joel to contact David Epstein regarding additional member engagement and feedback collection methods from the audience in the FDA quarterly meeting this morning.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Prepare for Next Meetings:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Joel to prepare the ADRG markdown file for migration and further testing.</p></li>
<li><p>Schedule next working group meeting in November 2025 and ensure clear objectives and tasks are assigned.</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ol>
</section>
</section>
</section>
<section id="nov2024" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="nov2024">13Nov2024</h2>
<p><br>
<strong>Attendees:</strong> Lovemore Gakava, Nicholas Masel, Joel Laxamana, Eric Nantz, Sam Parmar<br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Joel Laxamana</p>
<section id="agenda-3" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-3"><strong>Agenda:</strong></h4>
<ol type="1">
<li>House cleaning</li>
<li>Updates since FDA quartlery meeting presentation</li>
<li>ADRG discussion and steps to consider moving forward.</li>
<li>Actions</li>
</ol>
</section>
<section id="discussionissuesactions-3" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="discussionissuesactions-3">Discussion/Issues/Actions</h4>
<section id="house-cleaning" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="house-cleaning"><strong>House Cleaning:</strong></h5>
<ol type="1">
<li><p>Website updated with quarterly presentations to the FDA.</p></li>
<li><p>Added last month’s minutes and actions.</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
<section id="updates-since-fda-quarterly-meeting" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="updates-since-fda-quarterly-meeting"><strong>Updates since FDA quarterly meeting:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p>No further feedback from the FDA quarterly meeting yet; efforts to reach out to David will continue.</p></li>
<li><p>Christine Rossin will be contacted by Nick for assistance with ADRG review, including Sam P. in the correspondence.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="adrg-discussion-and-review" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="adrg-discussion-and-review"><strong>ADRG Discussion and review:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p>Discussion with Eric and Sam on using Quarto to generate ADRG and sending it as an HTML file in the eSUB package.</p></li>
<li><p>Need to support hybrid approaches for ADRG versioning (considering various languages, including SAS).</p></li>
<li><p>Include Christine Rossin in future meetings to discuss ADRG maintenance.</p></li>
<li><p>Contact vendors like P21 and CDISC core about the ADRG templates and discuss how the enhanced open-source ADRG will integrate. Christine might provide insights on how P21 sources templates from PHUSE WG.</p></li>
<li><p>Eric and Sam have joined the team.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="actions-1" class="level5">
<h5 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="actions-1"><strong>Actions:</strong></h5>
<ul>
<li><p>Ask Sam to share FDA guidance on mandatory ADRG sections.</p></li>
<li><p>Create specifications for sourcing metadata from the eCTD structure to generate the ADRG.</p></li>
<li><p>Nick to contact Christine for the next meeting on 11 December 2024.</p></li>
</ul>
<!-- -->
<ul>
<li><p>Consider moving Pilot 3 <code>adrg.qmd</code> to the PHUSE working project repository.</p></li>
<li><p>Begin programming functions to create metadata information for the ADRG, with reference to Slide 7 of the provided presentation.</p></li>
<li><p>Templatize open-source instructions for unpacking and re-executing analysis from the eSUB package in eCTD structure.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
</section>
<section id="nov2024-1" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="nov2024-1">27Nov2024</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Lovemore Gakava, Nicholas Masel, Joel Laxamana, Sam Parmar<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong>Christine Rossin (Guest from PHUSE ADRG WG)<br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Joel Laxamana</p>
<section id="agenda-4" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-4"><strong>Agenda</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>House Cleaning</p></li>
<li><p>Updates from actions since last meeting</p></li>
<li><p>New Topics</p></li>
<li><p>Actions.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="house-cleaning-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="house-cleaning-1"><strong>House Cleaning</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Minutes and actions from the last meeting added (follow-up).</p></li>
<li><p>Q4 reports submitted by Lovemore (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1468KYPejuBPo8AVlxmA7-I60oQq6ahB6/view?usp=drive_link">link</a>).</p></li>
<li><p>New members added to the working group’s <a href="https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1MsSA2hHLdrqbjN-HvxWzLkhWoT9Rze9Y?usp=drive_link">G-drive</a>.</p>
<ul>
<li>PHUSE WG does have a dedicated workspace to collaborate and save our Project WG files. Contact Alexandra Pearce (<a href="https://advance.hub.phuse.global/wiki/spaces/WEL/pages/26817363/Communication+of+Version+Metadata+for+Open-Source+Languages">link</a>).</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="updates-since-last-meeting" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="updates-since-last-meeting"><strong>Updates since last meeting</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>FDA guidance on mandatory ADRG sections shared by Sam (details provided by Sam below).</p>
<p><img src="references/ADRG required sections Screenshot 2024-11-27 145157.png" class="img-fluid"></p></li>
<li><p>Create specifications for sourcing metadata from the eCTD structure to generate the ADRG.</p>
<ul>
<li>Joel drafted a template for specifications on sourcing metadata for the ADRG (<a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cxwenwSCa_Xh4dw-bqCcWVmYnjjGMgb3X3DGDCflktU/edit?usp=drive_link">link</a>).</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Nick to contact Christine for the next meeting</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Christine was able to join today’s meeting.</p></li>
<li><p>Continued conversations with her will be needed for input on the updated ADRG.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Moving Pilot 3 adrg.qmd to the PHUSE working project repository</p>
<ul>
<li>Paused as further discussions with P21, CDISC Core and ADRG PHUSE WG still need to be had to align steps for us to contribute.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Programming functions for ADRG metadata creation.</p>
<ul>
<li>Paused as further discussions with P21, CDISC Core and ADRG PHUSE WG still need to be had to align steps for us to contribute.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Templatizing open-source instructions for unpacking and re-executing analysis</p>
<ul>
<li>Paused as further discussions with P21, CDISC Core and ADRG PHUSE WG still need to be had to align steps for us to contribute.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="new-topics-brought-up-with-christine-r." class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="new-topics-brought-up-with-christine-r."><strong>New topics brought up with Christine R.</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Collaboration with Christine Rossin on reviewing the ADRG:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Christine shared the current ADRG that is in review (unfortunatley public review has been closed, but we are asking for inclusion in the ADRG review).</p></li>
<li><p>We then shared our Project WG ‘Mission Statement’ and the RCRSWG Pilot 3 ADRG with Christine to review, where some feedback from her included :</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Exclude eCTD directory structure.</p></li>
<li><p>ADRG is an m5 directive, no need to mention m1 folder.</p></li>
<li><p>P21 pre-populates some ADRG sections, but some require manual sponsor updates.</p></li>
<li><p>Collaborating with P21 to improve metadata provision for the ADRG.</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="actions-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="actions-2"><strong>Actions</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Identify sections P21 populates and doesn’t populate in the ADRG.</p>
<ul>
<li>Joel to review and plan for automation contribution.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Determine how to contribute to automation for new ADRG versions. Needs discussion for supporting hybrid approaches (various languages).</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Lovemore (and Sam P.) to get in contact with Christine R. We can still invite Christine to future meetings as needed.</p>
<ul>
<li><p>We need to know what the specific changes we want to see updated in the ADRG for open-source submissions as well as the process for submitting updates.</p></li>
<li><p>We need to know Christine’s preferred method for collaboration.</p></li>
<li><p>We want to understand the submission process for approval of the updated template.</p></li>
<li><p>We also want to know the distribution methods for the approved template for the public to use (e.g.&nbsp;Sponsor, Pinnacle 21, CDISC).</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Further potential support from other Novo colleagues</p>
<ul>
<li>Lovemore to provide colleague’s contact information for joining the WG.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Contact Chris Price to find P21 and CDISC core contacts to see if we can get a meeting with them.</p>
<ul>
<li>Nick to get in touch with Chris P.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Complete metadata <a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cxwenwSCa_Xh4dw-bqCcWVmYnjjGMgb3X3DGDCflktU/edit?usp=drive_link">programming specifications</a> (date to be determined, but work on this can still begin to get our ideas out on ‘paper’).</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="thoughts-for-next-steps" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="thoughts-for-next-steps"><strong>Thoughts for next steps</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Decide on moving Pilot 3 adrg.qmd (further discussion needed).</p></li>
<li><p>Templatize open-source unpacking/re-executing analysis instructions.</p></li>
<li><p>Contact Alexandra Pearce regarding the PHUSE WG workspace (optional as current way of working may be fine, per Nick M).</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
<section id="dec2024" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="dec2024">11Dec2024</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Nicholas Masel, Sam Parmar, Steven Haesendonckx, Cervan Girard, Eric Nantz<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong><br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava</p>
<section id="agenda-5" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-5"><strong>Agenda</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>House Cleaning</p></li>
<li><p>Updates from actions since last meeting</p></li>
<li><p>New Topics</p></li>
<li><p>Actions.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="house-cleaning-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="house-cleaning-2"><strong>House Cleaning</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Welcome Cervan Girard</p></li>
<li><p>Minutes and actions from the last meeting added (follow-up).</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="updates-since-last-meeting-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="updates-since-last-meeting-1"><strong>Updates since last meeting</strong></h4>
<ul class="task-list">
<li><p><label><input type="checkbox" checked="">Further potential support from other Novo colleagues</label></p>
<ul>
<li>Lovemore to provide colleague’s contact information for joining the WG.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><label><input type="checkbox" checked="">Determine how to contribute to automation for new ADRG versions. Needs discussion for supporting hybrid approaches (various languages).</label></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Lovemore (and Sam P.) to get in contact with Christine R. We can still invite Christine to future meetings as needed.</p>
<ul>
<li><p>We need to know what the specific changes we want to see updated in the ADRG for open-source submissions as well as the process for submitting updates.</p></li>
<li><p>We need to know Christine’s preferred method for collaboration.</p></li>
<li><p>We want to understand the submission process for approval of the updated template.</p></li>
<li><p>We also want to know the distribution methods for the approved template for the public to use (e.g.&nbsp;Sponsor, Pinnacle 21, CDISC).</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><em>Status: Lovemore has already emailed Christine, and we’re awaiting her response on how to proceed with the ADRG template review and future collaboration.</em></p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><label><input type="checkbox">Identify sections P21 populates and doesn’t populate in the ADRG.</label></p>
<ul>
<li>Joel to review and plan for automation contribution.
<ul>
<li><em>Status - Ongoing. Team is encouraged to review the draft specification by Joel and we can discuss in our next scheduled meeting.</em></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><label><input type="checkbox" checked="">Contact Chris Price to find P21 and CDISC core contacts to see if we can get a meeting with them.</label></p>
<ul>
<li><p><em>Nick’s feedback from communications with Chris Price:</em></p>
<p><em>To avoid endorsing proprietary software, Chris recommends not collaborating with Pinnacle 21. Instead, we should develop an open and flexible solution that doesn’t lock sponsors into a specific vendor. Ultimately, we aim to provide a solution that adheres to CDISC core principles while allowing sponsors the freedom to integrate it seamlessly into their existing workflows.</em></p></li>
<li><p><em>Action: To ensure our approach aligns with industry standards, we’ll invite Sam Hume to explain the role of CDISC core. This will help us integrate CDISC standards into our solution effectively.</em></p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="discussion-topics" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="discussion-topics"><strong>Discussion Topics</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Confirm collaboration method with Christine R.</p>
<ul>
<li><em>Status: ongoing</em></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Nick to give update on PHUSE/FDA Computational Science Symposium (CSS) potential slot to have a breakout session:</p>
<ul>
<li><p><em>Nick reached out to the organizers and it was agreed that at the moment the breakout session will focus on the use of TEAL: industry adoption and the collaborative unified ecosystem.</em></p></li>
<li><p><em>Action: Discuss with team to decide whether we need a breakout session and if it’s going to be in the EU or US or both session?</em></p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Decide on moving Pilot 3 adrg.qmd (further discussion needed).</p>
<ul>
<li><p><em>Action: create a repository and use pilot3 or pilot 4 ADRG as starting template.</em></p>
<ul>
<li><a href="https://github.com/RConsortium/submissions-pilot4-webR/"><em>https://github.com/RConsortium/submissions-pilot4-webR/</em></a></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Templatize open-source unpacking/re-executing analysis instructions.</p>
<ul>
<li><p><em>Discussions:</em></p>
<ul>
<li><em><strong>OS computing environment:</strong> The idea of having an OS computing environment was discussed but dismissed as not currently viable due to legal and independence concerns for regulatory authorities.</em>
<ul>
<li><em><strong>Accumulus Synergy:</strong> A similar initiative, Accumulus Synergy, was mentioned (<a href="https://www.accumulus.org/">Home - Accumulus Synergy</a>). This platform provides a secure way for life sciences organizations and regulatory authorities to exchange information and collaborate.</em></li>
<li><em><strong>Scope:</strong> It was decided that further exploration of these ideas is outside the current scope and can be revisited after the first deliverable.</em></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><em>Action: Start on draft of an open-source unpacking/re-executing analysis instructions template. (when?)</em></p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="action-items-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="action-items-1"><strong>Action Items:</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>PHUSE ADRG Collaboration:</strong> Follow-up with Christine. (<strong>When:</strong> ASAP)</p></li>
<li><p><strong>CSS Breakout Session:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Decide whether a breakout session is needed.</p></li>
<li><p>If yes, decide whether it will be EU, US, or both.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Deadline:</strong> Before December 18th meeting.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Communicate decision to:</strong> Nick.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>ADRG Development &amp; Review:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Create a repository:</strong> Use pilot3 or pilot4 ADRG as a starting template.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Review metadata programming specifications:</strong> Provide feedback on specifications.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Identify P21 population in ADRG:</strong> Identify sections P21 populates and doesn’t populate.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Start drafting</strong> a template for open-source unpacking/re-executing analysis instructions.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Deadline for all the above:</strong> Before December 18th meeting (work can begin immediately).</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Automation Contribution Strategy:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Task:</strong> Develop an initial draft of the automation contribution strategy.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Deadline:</strong> Before December 18th meeting.</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Future</strong>:</p>
<ul>
<li>To ensure our approach aligns with industry standards, we’ll <strong>invite Sam Hume</strong> to explain the role of CDISC core. This will help us integrate CDISC standards into our solution effectively.</li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
<section id="jan2025" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="jan2025">08Jan2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Nicholas Masel, Sam Parmar, Cervan Girard, Eric Nantz<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> Christine Rossin (Guest from PHUSE ADRG WG)<br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava</p>
<section id="agenda-6" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-6"><strong>Agenda</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>House Cleaning</p></li>
<li><p>Updates from actions since last meeting</p></li>
<li><p>Discussion Topics and actions</p></li>
<li><p>Next Steps</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="house-cleaning-3" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="house-cleaning-3"><strong>House Cleaning</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li>Minutes and actions from the last meeting added (follow-up).</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="updates-since-last-meeting-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored"><strong>Updates since last meeting</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>CSS Breakout Session:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p><a href="https://www.phuse-events.org/attend/frontend/reg/thome.csp?pageID=48211&amp;eventID=75&amp;traceRedir=2">PHUSE/FDA CSS 2025</a></p>
<ul>
<li><p>Decide whether a breakout session is needed.</p></li>
<li><p>If yes, decide whether it will be EU, US, or both.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Deadline:</strong> Before December 18th meeting.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Communicate decision to:</strong> Nick.</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Nick, Joel, LG and Cervan to obtain approval from parent companies regarding attendance</p></li>
<li><p>Nick to determine if representation is needed from both:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>USA</p></li>
<li><p>European</p></li>
<li><p>Verify European attendance cap/limitations</p>
<ul>
<li>Note: Current attendance restrictions apply specifically to European participants.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>when: ASAP</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
<!-- -->
<ul>
<li><p><strong>PHUSE WG, RCSubWG &amp; FDA : ADRG @ Wed Dec 18, 2024 7:15am - 8am (PST) (<a href="mailto:hyesoo.cho@fda.hhs.gov">hyesoo.cho@fda.hhs.gov</a>) discussion:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><h2 id="feedbackcomments" class="anchored" data-anchor-id="updates-since-last-meeting-2">Feedback/comments?</h2></li>
<li><p><strong>Action</strong>:</p>
<ul>
<li>pushing this topic to 22-Jan-2025 for team to discuss further.</li>
<li>Upload document to Google drive for team to review.
<ul>
<li>who: LG</li>
<li>when: 15-Jan-2025</li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
<!-- -->
<ul>
<li><p><strong>PHUSE ADRG Collaboration:</strong> Follow-up with Christine. (<strong>When:</strong> ASAP)</p>
<ul>
<li><p>who: Sam</p></li>
<li><p>when: 15-Jan-2025</p></li>
<li><p>action: add her to the meeting invite</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>ADRG Development &amp; Review:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Create a repository:</strong> Use pilot3 or pilot4 ADRG as a starting template.</p>
<ul>
<li><p>who: LG</p></li>
<li><p>when:15-Jan-2025</p></li>
<li><p>action: ensure that members have access to the <a href="https://github.com/phuse-org">phuse-org</a> github organization</p></li>
<li><p>repo name : adrg-quarto</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Review metadata programming specifications:</strong> Provide feedback on specifications.</p>
<ul>
<li><p>check if everyone has access to Google drive?</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>resolved</strong>: everyone has access</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>when should everyone provide feedback?</p>
<ul>
<li>when: TBD - pushed to future meeting to discuss the different sections in detail.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Identify P21 population in ADRG:</strong> Identify sections P21 populates and doesn’t populate.</p>
<ul>
<li><p>who: Cervan</p></li>
<li><p>how: use cdisc pilot study and run it through pinnacle 21 and provide report to team.</p></li>
<li><p>when: 22-Jan-2025</p></li>
<li><p>Post meeting update: Joel has made a start - see document, https://docs.google.com/document/d/16Pz4NkVP_yC-FsoykENZTaPcV5gDu3LN/edit?usp=sharing&amp;ouid=103991081896680964420&amp;rtpof=true&amp;sd=true. Cervan to review.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Start drafting</strong> a template for open-source unpacking/re-executing analysis instructions.</p>
<ul>
<li><p>who: Steven (we have volunteered you :-)) , LG &amp; Cervan - provide NN example.</p></li>
<li><p>when: 22-Jan-2025</p></li>
<li><p>action: consider creating a package template to populate the adrg and this might be part of unpacking/re-executing analysis.</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Automation Contribution Strategy:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Task:</strong> Develop an initial draft of the automation contribution strategy.</p>
<ul>
<li>drafts of template? to confirm with Joel</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>when: 15-Jan-2025</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Invite Sam Hume</strong> to explain the role of CDISC core.</p>
<ul>
<li><p>who: Nick</p></li>
<li><p>when: Joel and LG to provide timelines to Nick by 15-Jan-2025</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="discussion-topics-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="discussion-topics-1"><strong>Discussion Topics:</strong></h4>
</section>
<section id="meeting-update---discussion-with-christine" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="meeting-update---discussion-with-christine">Meeting Update - Discussion with Christine</h4>
<p>Christine joined the last 20 minutes of the meeting (thanks to Sam’s invitation). During her time, we reviewed Hye Soo’s comments and discussed the following key points:</p>
</section>
<section id="key-discussion-points" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-discussion-points">Key Discussion Points</h4>
<p>Regarding Section 7 (Appendix: Instructions to Execute Analysis Programs in R):</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Christine recommends moving this to a separate supporting document</p></li>
<li><p>The ADRG template should remain software-neutral</p></li>
<li><p>We should develop separate completion guidelines for different software (R, SAS, and potential future additions)</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="next-steps" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="next-steps">Next Steps</h4>
<p>We need to include Christine in upcoming meetings to determine who will take ownership of writing the R completion guideline and discuss further the content of the template and the R completion guideline.</p>
</section>
</section>
<section id="jan2025-1" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="jan2025-1">22Jan2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Joel Laxamana, Nicholas Masel, Sam Parmar, Cervan Girard, Eric Nantz<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong><br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava</p>
<section id="agenda-7" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-7"><strong>Agenda</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>House Cleaning</p></li>
<li><p>Updates from actions since last meeting</p></li>
<li><p>Discussion Topics and actions</p></li>
<li><p>Next Steps</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="house-cleaning-4" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="house-cleaning-4"><strong>House Cleaning</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li>Minutes and actions from the last meeting added (follow-up).</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="updates-since-last-meeting-3" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="updates-since-last-meeting-3"><strong>Updates since last meeting</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>CSS Breakout Session:</p>
<ul>
<li>Approval for registration from LM granted for Cervan and Lovemore to attend the PHUSE/FDA CSS 2025 – Utrecht, the Netherlands</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>PHUSE WG, RCSubWG &amp; FDA : ADRG</p>
<ul>
<li>Action: setup follow-up meeting with FDA(HyeSoo, Paul and YounKyeong) to have alignment with Christine’s PHUSE ADRG group’s effort.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
<!-- -->
<ul>
<li><p>ADRG Development &amp; Review</p>
<ul>
<li>Confirmed that everyone now has access to the github repos</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="discussion-topics-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="discussion-topics-2"><strong>Discussion Topics:</strong></h4>
</section>
<section id="key-discussion-points-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-discussion-points-1">Key Discussion Points</h4>
<p><strong>Qn</strong>: Do regulatory agencies run the code that sponsors submit?</p>
<p><strong>Discussion</strong>: Based on teams experience sponsors submit readable and executable code.</p>
<p><strong>Action</strong>: Cervan and Lovemore to share the R submission by Novo in the next meeting.</p>
</section>
<section id="next-steps-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="next-steps-1">Next Steps</h4>
<p>Start working on the specification for writing reproducible code for the ADRG sections.</p>
</section>
</section>
<section id="feb2025" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="feb2025">05Feb2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Sam Parmar, Cervan Girard, Eric Nantz<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> Christine Rossin (Guest from PHUSE ADRG WG)<br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava</p>
<section id="agenda-8" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-8"><strong>Agenda</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>House Cleaning</p></li>
<li><p>Updates from actions since last meeting</p></li>
<li><p>Discussion Topics and actions</p></li>
<li><p>Next Steps</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="house-cleaning-5" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="house-cleaning-5"><strong>House Cleaning</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li>Minutes and actions from the last meeting added (follow-up).</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="updates-since-last-meeting-4" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="updates-since-last-meeting-4"><strong>Updates since last meeting</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>CSS Breakout Session:</p>
<ul>
<li>Cervan and Lovemore have registered for PHUSE/FDA CSS 2025 in Utrecht, the Netherlands.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>PHUSE WG, RCSubWG &amp; FDA : ADRG</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Meeting is on hold due to FDA reorganization impacting many parts of the agency.</p></li>
<li><p>Awaiting confirmation for when they will resume engagement.</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="discussion-topics-3" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="discussion-topics-3"><strong>Discussion Topics:</strong></h4>
</section>
<section id="key-discussion-points-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-discussion-points-2">Key Discussion Points</h4>
<p>Discussion of NN R submission</p>
<ul>
<li><p>P21 ADRG template usage:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>The ADRG from P21 was not used.</p></li>
<li><p>A function was used to take conformance results and populate the ADRG template.</p></li>
<li><p>Functions were created to dynamically get information for some ADRG sections.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Regulatory Feedback</p>
<ul>
<li><p>FDA/PMDA and Korean regulatory authorities ran the code and provided feedback/questions.</p></li>
<li><p>In some cases, they queried discrepancies between their results and the submitted results.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Environment Recreation:</p>
<ul>
<li>Provided in the ADRG appendix.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
<p>Christine’s feedback:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Agreement reached to write completion guidance document supporting the ADRG template.</p></li>
<li><p>Encouragement to use the P21 template with pre-populated ADRG sections to reduce errors.</p></li>
<li><p>Suggestion for alignment meeting with PHUSE ADRG WG and other groups (e.g., Estimands WG) working on ADRG sections.</p></li>
<li><p>Provided a walkthrough of different ADRG sections.</p></li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Actions</strong></p>
<ol type="1">
<li><p>Start working on an R Analysis Data Reviewer’s Guide Completion Guideline.</p>
<ul>
<li>Future adaptation for any Open Source software.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Christine to organize a meeting with all groups working on updating ADRG sections.</p></li>
<li><p>Members to start uploading utility functions used to populate or generate information for ADRG sections.</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
</section>
<section id="feb2025-1" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="feb2025-1">19Feb2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Sam Parmar, Nicholas Masel, Joel Laxamana<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> Christine Rossin (Guest from PHUSE ADRG WG)<br>
<strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava</p>
<section id="agenda-9" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-9"><strong>Agenda</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>House Cleaning</p></li>
<li><p>Updates from actions since last meeting</p></li>
<li><p>Discussion Topics and actions</p></li>
<li><p>Next Steps</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="house-cleaning-6" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="house-cleaning-6"><strong>House Cleaning</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li>Minutes and actions from the last meeting added (follow-up).</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="updates-since-last-meeting-5" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="updates-since-last-meeting-5"><strong>Updates since last meeting</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>PHUSE WG, RCSubWG &amp; FDA : ADRG</p>
<ul>
<li>We have received confirmation and list of dates of when they will be available for consultation.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="key-discussion-points-and-actions" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-discussion-points-and-actions"><strong>Key Discussion Points and Actions</strong></h4>
<ol type="1">
<li><p>PHUSE WG, RCSubWG &amp; FDA : ADRG</p>
<p><strong>Action</strong>: Joel has setup a meeting invitation which includes our group, FDA and the PHUSE ADRG WG: 2/27, Thursday.</p></li>
<li><p>R Analysis Data Reviewer’s Guide Completion Guideline</p>
<ul>
<li><p><a href="https://r4csr.org/submission-package.html">R for Clinical Study Reports and Submission</a> - discuss chapter 14 and 15</p>
<p><strong>Action</strong>: Invite the authors of the book(Yilong Zhang, Nan Xiao, Keaven Anderson and Yalin Zhu) to participate in the group. Time to be determined.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Christine to organize a meeting with all groups working on updating ADRG sections and also provide draft ADRG guideline.</p>
<p><strong>Update</strong>: Christine to have a discussion with the wider ADRG WG and will let us know of the next steps.</p></li>
<li><p>Members uploading utility functions used to populate ADRG sections</p>
<p><strong>Update</strong>: The repo <code>adrg-quarto</code> has been renamed <code>adrgrOS</code> - this repo will now be turned into an R package.we will need to move the <em>pilot3</em> and <code>renv</code> associated with it to a dev folder. Joel has made <code>issues</code> for the different sections of the ADRG.</p>
<p><strong>Action</strong>:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Setup the repository as an R package with workflows/actions. <em>(any volunteers?)</em></p></li>
<li><p>Members to agree of process of working such as creating of issues, PR, coding standards etc</p></li>
<li><p>Members to self assign on issues and start creating the utility functions.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>Prepare for CSS</p>
<ul>
<li><p>start drafting the presentation material. The abstract had the following as objectives</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Preview and provide input on the draft ADRG template designed for open-source statistical programming.</p></li>
<li><p>Discuss proposed automated approaches for metadata documentation</p></li>
<li><p>Explore preliminary solutions for hybrid submissions using both proprietary and open-source tools</p></li>
<li><p>Participate in shaping industry standards for statistical programming documentation by gathering community feedback.</p></li>
</ul></li>
<li><p><strong>Action</strong>: setup draft CSS presentation material. Assigned to LG.</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ol>
</section>
</section>
<section id="mar2025" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="mar2025">19Mar2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Joel Laxamana, Lovemore Gakava, Nicholas Masel, Eric Nantz<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> N/A</p>
<p><strong>Facilitator:</strong> Joel Laxamana</p>
<section id="agenda-10" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="agenda-10"><strong>Agenda</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>House Cleaning</p></li>
<li><p>Updates from actions since last meeting</p></li>
<li><p>Discussion Topics and actions</p></li>
<li><p>Next Steps</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="house-cleaning-7" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="house-cleaning-7"><strong>House Cleaning</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li>Minutes and actions from the last meeting added (follow-up).</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="updates-since-last-meeting-6" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="updates-since-last-meeting-6"><strong>Updates since last meeting</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>PHUSE WG, RCSubWG &amp; FDA : ADRG</p>
<ul>
<li>Agreement between all 3 entities to meet monthly until alignment on ADRG updates for open-source submissions are met.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="key-discussion-points-and-actions-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-discussion-points-and-actions-1"><strong>Key Discussion Points and Actions</strong></h4>
<ol type="1">
<li><p>Review of the email discussion between DVOST, Data Standards and RCRSWG-FDA</p></li>
<li><p>Ning’s work on AI-ing ADRG</p></li>
<li><p>Work for ADRGOS Package</p></li>
<li><p>CSS agenda</p></li>
<li><p>Monthly meetings setup by Joel</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
<section id="collaboration-between-dvost-data-standards-and-rcrswg-fda-colleagues." class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="collaboration-between-dvost-data-standards-and-rcrswg-fda-colleagues."><strong>Collaboration between DVOST, Data Standards and RCRSWG FDA colleagues.</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Written public communication, by the agency, will remain limited until further notice.</p></li>
<li><p>This is a subcommittee of our current working group (R consortium’s R submission working group) and meets jointly with Christine and PHUSE. We are not a separate&nbsp;working group, but a sub-committee composed of the 3 groups aformentioned.</p></li>
<li><p>The proposed time (first Friday of each month from 1pm to 2pm, EST) will be set moving forward.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="work-on-ai-ing-the-adrg" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="work-on-ai-ing-the-adrg"><strong>Work on “AI-ing” the ADRG</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Open source is beneficial but our approach offers higher accuracy at this time.</p></li>
<li><p>AI can assist as a code assistant but shouldn’t constitute the entire pipeline to generate the metadata needed in the ADRG.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="work-for-adrgos-package" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="work-for-adrgos-package"><strong>Work for adrgOS Package</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Continue creating functions based on current issues.</p></li>
<li><p>By the end of the month (issues 6, 8, 10, 12, 14):</p>
<ul>
<li><p>High likelihood (#12) that all internal R projects will use <code>renv</code>. Our function can utilize <code>renv</code> to populate the R package list with additional guidance for sponsors to include any further study-specific installation instructions.</p></li>
<li><p>Create branches for each issue to track active and inactive progress.</p></li>
<li><p>Dependencies/imports list for the package will be maintained manually by Joel</p></li>
<li><p>Setup the repository as an R package with workflows/actions. <em>(Lovemore and/or Eric)</em></p></li>
<li><p>Members agreed on process of working</p>
<ul>
<li><p>such as creating of issues and corresponding branches to work in</p></li>
<li><p>PR to dev branch first</p></li>
<li><p>once all functions drafted and working, we can do an initial merge to main for any further testing.</p></li>
<li><p>Members to self assign on issues and start creating the utility functions.</p></li>
</ul></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="continue-css-preparation" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="continue-css-preparation"><strong>Continue CSS preparation</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p>start drafting the presentation material. The abstract had the following as objectives</p></li>
<li><p>Preview and provide input on the draft ADRG template designed for open-source statistical programming.</p></li>
<li><p>Discuss proposed automated approaches for metadata documentation</p></li>
<li><p>Explore preliminary solutions for hybrid submissions using both proprietary and open-source tools</p></li>
<li><p>Participate in shaping industry standards for statistical programming documentation by gathering community feedback</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="next-steps-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="next-steps-2"><strong>Next Steps</strong></h4>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Nick M.</strong> to create a development branch in adrgOS (completed)</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Team</strong> to start work on adrgOS Package</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Nick M</strong>. to create PR templates</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Joel</strong> to set up monthly meetings (completed)</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Joel to Meet with Christine</strong> at PHUSE US to get current draft ADRG for review (completed and email sent to the team).</p></li>
<li><p><strong>LG</strong> Setup draft CSS presentation material. Assigned to LG.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
<section id="apr2025" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="apr2025">16Apr2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Lovemore Gakava, Nicholas Masel, Eric Nantz, Sam Parmar<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> N/A</p>
<p><strong>Facilitator:</strong> Joel Laxamana</p>
<section id="summary" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="summary">Summary:</h4>
<p>Updates were provided on ongoing projects related to the development of the CSS presentation and the ADRG package. L Gakava mentioned the creation of a draft document in Google Drive, which will be refined and shared for feedback. The discussion highlighted challenges with core variables in defined files, noting that different companies have varying practices. Joel emphasized the importance of maintaining standardization in outputs from Pinnacle 21, while the group recognized the need for collaboration to effectively address these challenges.</p>
<p>The team discussed the selection of core variables and the complexities of mapping functions to R packages. Joel shared his approach to managing R packages, including lock files and session information, while L Gakava is developing a generalized function based on team feedback. Sam pointed out that static code analysis may not be sufficient for mapping, referencing LogRx as an example. The conversation underscored the necessity of working with the consortium group to streamline package documentation and ensure clarity in the purpose of dependency information in submissions.</p>
<p>Further discussions focused on the development of a supplementary guidance document for the ADRG and the structure of the ADRG completion guidelines. L Gakava proposed a template for R code usage, while Joel suggested including auto-reproducibility steps in the completion guide. The team acknowledged the need for flexibility in their R package to accommodate varying sponsor approaches and emphasized the importance of aligning their methods with evolving industry standards. Concerns were raised about the impact of changes in Pinnacle 21 on their processes, leading to a suggestion to involve a technical expert from Pinnacle 21 to enhance collaboration and ensure their tools remain relevant.</p>
</section>
<section id="action-items-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="action-items-2">Action Items:</h4>
<ul>
<li><p>L Gakava will refine the outline for the upcoming CSS presentation and circulate it for comments.</p></li>
<li><p>L Gakava will share the generalized function for core variables with the group for feedback.</p></li>
<li><p>Joel Laxamana will list out the R packages needed for the project and test the function to ensure it works correctly.</p></li>
<li><p>Joel Laxamana will follow up with Christine to clarify the information needed for the ADRG versus the R completion package.</p></li>
<li><p>Eric Nantz will disable some actions in the project until the team is in a better position to start checking.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="key-questions" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-questions">Key Questions:</h4>
<ul>
<li><p>What is the timeline for refining the outline for the CSS presentation?</p></li>
<li><p>Are we still in agreement on putting the information in the supplementary document?</p></li>
<li><p>What are the input artifacts needed to do this work?</p></li>
<li><p>How will the team ensure that the functions developed will meet the needs of both the ADRG and the R completion package?</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
<section id="apr2025-1" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="apr2025-1">30Apr2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Joel Laxamana, Nicholas Masel, Eric Nantz, Sam Parmar, Piotr Pasza Storożenko<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> N/A</p>
<p><strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava</p>
<section id="summary-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="summary-1">Summary:</h4>
<p>The discussion focused on current issues and collaborative efforts within the PHUSE metadata working group, highlighting the importance of open-source contributions in clinical trials. Joel Laxamana addressed the ongoing migration to new systems and the need for accurate documentation, while Lovemore Gakava and Piotr Pasza Storożenko expressed enthusiasm for collaboration. The team reviewed action items from the previous meeting, including responsibilities for compiling necessary packages and clarifying guidance documents.</p>
<p>The group delved into the specifics of the Analysis Data Reviewer Guide (ADRG), discussing the conversion of SAS code to TXT for pilot studies and the acceptable use of R syntax for submissions. They examined the distinctions between various sections of the ADRG, emphasizing the need for clarity in documentation. Piotr Pasza Storożenko and Eric Nantz agreed on the importance of including both package names and functions in the documentation, particularly for FDA reviewers who predominantly use Windows. The conversation also covered the management of system dependencies and the challenges posed by different operating systems.</p>
<p>Regulatory submission practices were a key topic, with Nicholas Masel questioning the necessity of converting .R files to .txt formats. Eric Nantz clarified that .R files are compliant with ECTD specifications, addressing previous confusion. The team discussed the implications of using zip files for packaging submissions, noting that while some instances were accepted, regulatory discussions are ongoing.</p>
<p>L Gakava encouraged the use of RStudio and R Markdown for documentation, while the team agreed on the importance of maintaining simple and accessible documentation practices. The meeting concluded with plans for future collaboration and contributions to open-source initiatives.</p>
</section>
<section id="action-items-3" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="action-items-3">Action Items:</h4>
<ul>
<li>Joel Laxamana will make sure to put up the meeting minutes from last week, including the current meeting notes.</li>
<li>Joel Laxamana will list out the other packages needed for the project and test functions to ensure they work correctly.</li>
<li>Eric Nantz will disable some actions in the project until the team is in a better position to start checking.</li>
<li>Lovemore Gakava will draw up the outline for the CSS presentation and share it with the team before the next meeting.</li>
<li>Lovemore Gakava will summarize the previous meeting with the FDA and discuss it in the next meeting.</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="key-questions-1" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-questions-1">Key Questions:</h4>
<ul>
<li>How will the team ensure that the functions developed will meet the needs of both the ADRG and the R ADRG completion guideline package?</li>
<li>How will the team document the functions and packages used in the ADRG?</li>
<li>What are the key takeaways from the previous meeting with the FDA?</li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
<section id="may2025" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="may2025">14May2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Joel Laxamana, Sam Parmar, Lovemore Gakava <strong>Absent:</strong> Nicholas Masel, Eric Nantz, Piotr Pasza Storożenko<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> N/A</p>
<p><strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava</p>
<section id="summary-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="summary-2">Summary:</h4>
<p>The discussion focused on the completion of action items from previous meetings, including the implementation of AI for meeting minutes and the testing of dependency packages. The upcoming CSS presentation was highlighted, with expectations of around 60 attendees, including representatives from PMDA and EMA. The aim is to present their current plans and gather feedback from these regulatory authorities. Lovemore Gakava mentioned the creation of a development folder to organize presentation materials for improved efficiency in future sessions.</p>
<p>The appropriateness of naming the FDA in documentation was addressed, with Joel Laxamana suggesting that they refer to the FDA as members of the R Consortium to avoid direct attribution. The team agreed to present their collaboration with the R Consortium while omitting explicit mentions of the FDA. Gakava outlined the group’s objectives, including the development of a standardized template to enhance submission processes. The conversation also touched on transitioning from proprietary software to open-source alternatives, with a focus on language consistency and the benefits of using Quarto.</p>
<p>The meeting included discussions on stakeholder engagement and feedback collection to inform the action plan for ARRA deliverables. Key findings emphasized the need for environmental reproducibility and automated solutions to alleviate manual documentation burdens. Gakava is set to revise the slide deck based on feedback, with plans to distribute it via email.</p>
<p>The group also addressed technical challenges related to QMD file rendering and the management of uncommitted files. Overall, the team expressed optimism about their direction and the potential for future progress, while acknowledging the need for offline discussions to enhance collaboration.</p>
</section>
<section id="action-items-4" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="action-items-4">Action Items:</h4>
<ul>
<li><p>Joel Laxamana will continue testing the inclusion of dependency packages in addition to the parent packages.</p></li>
<li><p>Lovemore Gakava will change the phrasing in the presentation to avoid directly naming the FDA and instead refer to the R Consortium.</p></li>
<li><p>Lovemore Gakava will create a video recording to demonstrate some functions of the R package for the upcoming presentation.</p></li>
<li><p>Lovemore Gakava will update the slide deck based on the comments received during the meeting.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="key-questions-2" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-questions-2">Key Questions:</h4>
<ul>
<li>What are the specific challenges faced when transitioning from proprietary software to open-source software?
<ul>
<li>Proposed answer:&nbsp;The challenges include package dependencies management, version control complexities, and reproducibility concerns across environments.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>How will feedback from regulatory authorities be collected during the presentation?
<ul>
<li>Proposed answer:&nbsp;Feedback will be gathered through open questions during the presentation.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>Should the presentation include a live demo or a video recording of the functions?
<ul>
<li>Proposed answer:&nbsp;A video recording is preferred to avoid technical issues during the presentation.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
<section id="may2025-1" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="may2025-1">28May2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Joel Laxamana, Lovemore Gakava, Nicholas Masel, Eric Nantz <strong>Absent:</strong> Sam Parmar, Piotr Pasza Storożenko, Steven H.<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> N/A</p>
<p><strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava</p>
<section id="summary-3" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="summary-3">Summary:</h4>
<p>The discussion centered on the progress and challenges related to the ADRG content and its alignment with regulatory expectations. L Gakava recounted positive interactions at the EU CSS session, highlighting the interest from the EMA and the need for regulatory bodies to harmonize their expectations. Joel Laxamana emphasized the importance of creating tools and providing examples to establish standards for ADRG content. The group also discussed the necessity of guidance documents and templates to facilitate the ADRG process, while addressing concerns regarding the use of open-source platforms for regulatory purposes, particularly in light of the FDA’s apprehensions about bias.</p>
<p>Further discussions included the feedback received from the EMA and the absence of FDA representatives, with Eric Nantz expressing optimism about the alignment of requirements between the two agencies. Nicholas Masel stressed the urgency of identifying any differences due to ongoing trials involving multiple submissions. The team also explored the potential use of LLMs for ADRG generation and the progress of the pilot project, with Nantz detailing infrastructure challenges and upcoming revisions. The meeting concluded with plans to reconvene in two weeks to continue collaboration on ADRG and SDRG initiatives, with a focus on enhancing processes and ensuring alignment across regulatory bodies.</p>
</section>
<section id="action-items-5" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="action-items-5">Action Items:</h4>
<ul>
<li><p>L Gakava will reach out to Frank Petavi from EMA when the team is ready to get input on draft documents.</p></li>
<li><p>Joel Laxamana will ensure Christine joins the next meeting to discuss feedback from Paul, Hyesoo, and Youn.</p></li>
<li><p>L Gakava will set up a meeting with the person responsible for automating the generation of SDRNG to gather feedback on their process.</p></li>
<li><p>Eric Nantz will finalize the ADRGs for Pilot 4 and prepare for the revised transfer on June 13th.</p></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="key-questions-3" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-questions-3">Key Questions:</h4>
<ul>
<li>How can the team ensure alignment between different regulatory authorities regarding the ADRG?<br>
** Proposed answer: The team can facilitate discussions between regulatory authorities to ensure alignment.</li>
</ul>
</section>
</section>
<section id="jun2025" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="jun2025">11Jun2025</h2>
<p>Meeting Cancelled</p>
<section id="summary-email" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="summary-email">Summary email:</h4>
<p>Hi, all.</p>
<p>Lovemore and I decided that we can cancel today’s meeting and provide updates through email (Lovemore if you are able to remove today’s meeting event from our calendars that would be good).</p>
<p>At this time, you may have seen an email from me taking the latest ADRG in public review from Christine Rossin’s PHUSE Data Standards group, and I’ve updated this version with input from the R Consortium RSWG sub-committee HyeSoo, Youn and Paul, with examples of the information we would want to see for a R Submission. The updated version is available for all of us to review if you have any further feedback on it, before we send it back to Christine.</p>
<p>In other news, unfortunatley, Pasza Storozenko , will have to transition off of our PHUSE project due to other priorities. Though he did contribute to a potential ask from the RCRSWG on listing out functions and the packages these functions come from. See here : <a href="https://github.com/phuse-org/adrgOS/issues/12#issuecomment-2917047864" class="uri">https://github.com/phuse-org/adrgOS/issues/12#issuecomment-2917047864</a> Thanks, Pasza!</p>
<p>As always, other actions are still available for assignment here : <a href="https://github.com/phuse-org/adrgOS/issues" class="uri">https://github.com/phuse-org/adrgOS/issues</a></p>
<p>Lovemore is still working on the ADSL core variables and I will be updating PR <a href="https://github.com/phuse-org/adrgOS/pull/20" class="uri">https://github.com/phuse-org/adrgOS/pull/20</a> given feedback about also adding the first tier dependency packages from parent packages we present in the ADRG.</p>
<p>Once we finalize the R submission ADRG example, through the PHUSE Data Standards gorup, we’ll have a better idea of what our adrgOS package needs to deliver and can also begin writing our ADRG completion guides for an R submission. This will then help deliver our remit of having an updated ADRG template for open-source submission, a completion guide focusing on R Submission, including an ADRG example for a R Submisison.</p>
<p>Let me know if you have any further questions or anything else to discuss in our future meetings.</p>
<p>Thanks.</p>
<p>Joel and Lovemore.</p>
</section>
</section>
<section id="jun2025-1" class="level2">
<h2 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="jun2025-1">25Jun2025</h2>
<p><strong>Attendees:</strong> Joel Laxamana, Lovemore Gakava, Eric Nantz <strong>Absent:</strong> Sam Parmar, Piotr Pasza Storożenko, Steven H., Nicholas Masel<br>
<strong>Guest(s):</strong> N/A</p>
<p><strong>Facilitator:</strong> Lovemore Gakava, Joel Laxamana</p>
<section id="summary-4" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="summary-4">Summary:</h4>
<p>The discussion centered on the complexities of core variables from ADSL, with L Gakava highlighting the need for a clear distinction between common and unique variables across different ADaM domains. He proposed creating a comprehensive table to assist sponsors in understanding which ADSL variables are essential for their specific trials. Joel Laxamana supported this by suggesting that all ADSL variables be included as core variables across all atoms, which would streamline the process. They agreed on the importance of documenting this functionality in the R completion guide to enhance clarity for sponsors.</p>
<p>Updates to the ADRG template were reviewed, particularly Section 7, which addresses the submission of programs for analysis data sets. Joel Laxamana incorporated feedback from colleagues, including Eric Nantz, who stressed the importance of documenting CPU architecture for reproducibility. They discussed the balance between general platform statements and specific details in a table format, ultimately agreeing on the current structure while allowing for future enhancements. Additionally, L Gakava and Joel Laxamana explored the functionalities of LogRx and Well, focusing on script execution and data storage, while addressing the challenges of standardizing output titles and the potential need for a metadata system.</p>
<p>The team also examined the extraction of metadata for SAS and R programs, with Joel suggesting that package manuals could sufficiently describe functions, reducing the need for additional metadata. They discussed website formatting issues and the need for automation in the publishing process. L Gakava introduced a data generation tool capable of creating CRF protocols, SAPs, and SAS code from templates, which impressed Eric Nantz and Joel Laxamana. They recognized the tool’s potential to enhance the onboarding process for newcomers in the industry and expressed a desire to connect with its developer for further collaboration.</p>
</section>
<section id="action-items-6" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="action-items-6">Action Items:</h4>
<ul>
<li>Lovemore Gakava will prepare a list of core variables from ADSL by the end of the week for review.</li>
<li>Joel Laxamana will share the updated ADRG template with the group for review.
<ul>
<li>Post meeting note : R Consortium member, HyeSoo has responded with feedback from their end regarding the ADRG updates. It is now on our group to review and add any further comments before sending to Christine R.</li>
<li><a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Fq_VtUBU2ZhEY21vj2G9llqTIoN2PdbC/view?usp=drive_link" class="uri">https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Fq_VtUBU2ZhEY21vj2G9llqTIoN2PdbC/view?usp=drive_link</a></li>
<li><a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/19ajxtpvbkD9KzcPT9f-NvdILnugK1idq/edit?usp=drive_link&amp;ouid=103991081896680964420&amp;rtpof=true&amp;sd=true" class="uri">https://docs.google.com/document/d/19ajxtpvbkD9KzcPT9f-NvdILnugK1idq/edit?usp=drive_link&amp;ouid=103991081896680964420&amp;rtpof=true&amp;sd=true</a></li>
</ul></li>
<li>Lovemore Gakava will explore the functionality of LogRx and its implementation for future discussions.</li>
<li>Eric Nantz will investigate the formatting issue on the website and provide feedback.
<ul>
<li>Post meeting note : that after including these meeting minutes, Joel has fixed the css issues and website now formatting ok.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section id="key-questions-4" class="level4">
<h4 class="anchored" data-anchor-id="key-questions-4">Key Questions:</h4>
<ul>
<li><p>What is the best way to handle core variables that are not common across all domains and the core variables from ADSL?</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>Proposed answer:</strong> The handling of core variables should consider the specific variables that appear in each domain.</li>
</ul></li>
<li><p>What is the standard practice for including ADSL variables that are not needed for all atoms?</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>Proposed answer:</strong> The inclusion of ADSL variables is often specific to the trial being conducted.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>


</section>
</section>

</main> <!-- /main -->
<script id="quarto-html-after-body" type="application/javascript">
  window.document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", function (event) {
    const icon = "";
    const anchorJS = new window.AnchorJS();
    anchorJS.options = {
      placement: 'right',
      icon: icon
    };
    anchorJS.add('.anchored');
    const isCodeAnnotation = (el) => {
      for (const clz of el.classList) {
        if (clz.startsWith('code-annotation-')) {                     
          return true;
        }
      }
      return false;
    }
    const onCopySuccess = function(e) {
      // button target
      const button = e.trigger;
      // don't keep focus
      button.blur();
      // flash "checked"
      button.classList.add('code-copy-button-checked');
      var currentTitle = button.getAttribute("title");
      button.setAttribute("title", "Copied!");
      let tooltip;
      if (window.bootstrap) {
        button.setAttribute("data-bs-toggle", "tooltip");
        button.setAttribute("data-bs-placement", "left");
        button.setAttribute("data-bs-title", "Copied!");
        tooltip = new bootstrap.Tooltip(button, 
          { trigger: "manual", 
            customClass: "code-copy-button-tooltip",
            offset: [0, -8]});
        tooltip.show();    
      }
      setTimeout(function() {
        if (tooltip) {
          tooltip.hide();
          button.removeAttribute("data-bs-title");
          button.removeAttribute("data-bs-toggle");
          button.removeAttribute("data-bs-placement");
        }
        button.setAttribute("title", currentTitle);
        button.classList.remove('code-copy-button-checked');
      }, 1000);
      // clear code selection
      e.clearSelection();
    }
    const getTextToCopy = function(trigger) {
        const codeEl = trigger.previousElementSibling.cloneNode(true);
        for (const childEl of codeEl.children) {
          if (isCodeAnnotation(childEl)) {
            childEl.remove();
          }
        }
        return codeEl.innerText;
    }
    const clipboard = new window.ClipboardJS('.code-copy-button:not([data-in-quarto-modal])', {
      text: getTextToCopy
    });
    clipboard.on('success', onCopySuccess);
    if (window.document.getElementById('quarto-embedded-source-code-modal')) {
      const clipboardModal = new window.ClipboardJS('.code-copy-button[data-in-quarto-modal]', {
        text: getTextToCopy,
        container: window.document.getElementById('quarto-embedded-source-code-modal')
      });
      clipboardModal.on('success', onCopySuccess);
    }
      var localhostRegex = new RegExp(/^(?:http|https):\/\/localhost\:?[0-9]*\//);
      var mailtoRegex = new RegExp(/^mailto:/);
        var filterRegex = new RegExp('/' + window.location.host + '/');
      var isInternal = (href) => {
          return filterRegex.test(href) || localhostRegex.test(href) || mailtoRegex.test(href);
      }
      // Inspect non-navigation links and adorn them if external
     var links = window.document.querySelectorAll('a[href]:not(.nav-link):not(.navbar-brand):not(.toc-action):not(.sidebar-link):not(.sidebar-item-toggle):not(.pagination-link):not(.no-external):not([aria-hidden]):not(.dropdown-item):not(.quarto-navigation-tool):not(.about-link)');
      for (var i=0; i<links.length; i++) {
        const link = links[i];
        if (!isInternal(link.href)) {
          // undo the damage that might have been done by quarto-nav.js in the case of
          // links that we want to consider external
          if (link.dataset.originalHref !== undefined) {
            link.href = link.dataset.originalHref;
          }
        }
      }
    function tippyHover(el, contentFn, onTriggerFn, onUntriggerFn) {
      const config = {
        allowHTML: true,
        maxWidth: 500,
        delay: 100,
        arrow: false,
        appendTo: function(el) {
            return el.parentElement;
        },
        interactive: true,
        interactiveBorder: 10,
        theme: 'quarto',
        placement: 'bottom-start',
      };
      if (contentFn) {
        config.content = contentFn;
      }
      if (onTriggerFn) {
        config.onTrigger = onTriggerFn;
      }
      if (onUntriggerFn) {
        config.onUntrigger = onUntriggerFn;
      }
      window.tippy(el, config); 
    }
    const noterefs = window.document.querySelectorAll('a[role="doc-noteref"]');
    for (var i=0; i<noterefs.length; i++) {
      const ref = noterefs[i];
      tippyHover(ref, function() {
        // use id or data attribute instead here
        let href = ref.getAttribute('data-footnote-href') || ref.getAttribute('href');
        try { href = new URL(href).hash; } catch {}
        const id = href.replace(/^#\/?/, "");
        const note = window.document.getElementById(id);
        if (note) {
          return note.innerHTML;
        } else {
          return "";
        }
      });
    }
    const xrefs = window.document.querySelectorAll('a.quarto-xref');
    const processXRef = (id, note) => {
      // Strip column container classes
      const stripColumnClz = (el) => {
        el.classList.remove("page-full", "page-columns");
        if (el.children) {
          for (const child of el.children) {
            stripColumnClz(child);
          }
        }
      }
      stripColumnClz(note)
      if (id === null || id.startsWith('sec-')) {
        // Special case sections, only their first couple elements
        const container = document.createElement("div");
        if (note.children && note.children.length > 2) {
          container.appendChild(note.children[0].cloneNode(true));
          for (let i = 1; i < note.children.length; i++) {
            const child = note.children[i];
            if (child.tagName === "P" && child.innerText === "") {
              continue;
            } else {
              container.appendChild(child.cloneNode(true));
              break;
            }
          }
          if (window.Quarto?.typesetMath) {
            window.Quarto.typesetMath(container);
          }
          return container.innerHTML
        } else {
          if (window.Quarto?.typesetMath) {
            window.Quarto.typesetMath(note);
          }
          return note.innerHTML;
        }
      } else {
        // Remove any anchor links if they are present
        const anchorLink = note.querySelector('a.anchorjs-link');
        if (anchorLink) {
          anchorLink.remove();
        }
        if (window.Quarto?.typesetMath) {
          window.Quarto.typesetMath(note);
        }
        if (note.classList.contains("callout")) {
          return note.outerHTML;
        } else {
          return note.innerHTML;
        }
      }
    }
    for (var i=0; i<xrefs.length; i++) {
      const xref = xrefs[i];
      tippyHover(xref, undefined, function(instance) {
        instance.disable();
        let url = xref.getAttribute('href');
        let hash = undefined; 
        if (url.startsWith('#')) {
          hash = url;
        } else {
          try { hash = new URL(url).hash; } catch {}
        }
        if (hash) {
          const id = hash.replace(/^#\/?/, "");
          const note = window.document.getElementById(id);
          if (note !== null) {
            try {
              const html = processXRef(id, note.cloneNode(true));
              instance.setContent(html);
            } finally {
              instance.enable();
              instance.show();
            }
          } else {
            // See if we can fetch this
            fetch(url.split('#')[0])
            .then(res => res.text())
            .then(html => {
              const parser = new DOMParser();
              const htmlDoc = parser.parseFromString(html, "text/html");
              const note = htmlDoc.getElementById(id);
              if (note !== null) {
                const html = processXRef(id, note);
                instance.setContent(html);
              } 
            }).finally(() => {
              instance.enable();
              instance.show();
            });
          }
        } else {
          // See if we can fetch a full url (with no hash to target)
          // This is a special case and we should probably do some content thinning / targeting
          fetch(url)
          .then(res => res.text())
          .then(html => {
            const parser = new DOMParser();
            const htmlDoc = parser.parseFromString(html, "text/html");
            const note = htmlDoc.querySelector('main.content');
            if (note !== null) {
              // This should only happen for chapter cross references
              // (since there is no id in the URL)
              // remove the first header
              if (note.children.length > 0 && note.children[0].tagName === "HEADER") {
                note.children[0].remove();
              }
              const html = processXRef(null, note);
              instance.setContent(html);
            } 
          }).finally(() => {
            instance.enable();
            instance.show();
          });
        }
      }, function(instance) {
      });
    }
        let selectedAnnoteEl;
        const selectorForAnnotation = ( cell, annotation) => {
          let cellAttr = 'data-code-cell="' + cell + '"';
          let lineAttr = 'data-code-annotation="' +  annotation + '"';
          const selector = 'span[' + cellAttr + '][' + lineAttr + ']';
          return selector;
        }
        const selectCodeLines = (annoteEl) => {
          const doc = window.document;
          const targetCell = annoteEl.getAttribute("data-target-cell");
          const targetAnnotation = annoteEl.getAttribute("data-target-annotation");
          const annoteSpan = window.document.querySelector(selectorForAnnotation(targetCell, targetAnnotation));
          const lines = annoteSpan.getAttribute("data-code-lines").split(",");
          const lineIds = lines.map((line) => {
            return targetCell + "-" + line;
          })
          let top = null;
          let height = null;
          let parent = null;
          if (lineIds.length > 0) {
              //compute the position of the single el (top and bottom and make a div)
              const el = window.document.getElementById(lineIds[0]);
              top = el.offsetTop;
              height = el.offsetHeight;
              parent = el.parentElement.parentElement;
            if (lineIds.length > 1) {
              const lastEl = window.document.getElementById(lineIds[lineIds.length - 1]);
              const bottom = lastEl.offsetTop + lastEl.offsetHeight;
              height = bottom - top;
            }
            if (top !== null && height !== null && parent !== null) {
              // cook up a div (if necessary) and position it 
              let div = window.document.getElementById("code-annotation-line-highlight");
              if (div === null) {
                div = window.document.createElement("div");
                div.setAttribute("id", "code-annotation-line-highlight");
                div.style.position = 'absolute';
                parent.appendChild(div);
              }
              div.style.top = top - 2 + "px";
              div.style.height = height + 4 + "px";
              div.style.left = 0;
              let gutterDiv = window.document.getElementById("code-annotation-line-highlight-gutter");
              if (gutterDiv === null) {
                gutterDiv = window.document.createElement("div");
                gutterDiv.setAttribute("id", "code-annotation-line-highlight-gutter");
                gutterDiv.style.position = 'absolute';
                const codeCell = window.document.getElementById(targetCell);
                const gutter = codeCell.querySelector('.code-annotation-gutter');
                gutter.appendChild(gutterDiv);
              }
              gutterDiv.style.top = top - 2 + "px";
              gutterDiv.style.height = height + 4 + "px";
            }
            selectedAnnoteEl = annoteEl;
          }
        };
        const unselectCodeLines = () => {
          const elementsIds = ["code-annotation-line-highlight", "code-annotation-line-highlight-gutter"];
          elementsIds.forEach((elId) => {
            const div = window.document.getElementById(elId);
            if (div) {
              div.remove();
            }
          });
          selectedAnnoteEl = undefined;
        };
          // Handle positioning of the toggle
      window.addEventListener(
        "resize",
        throttle(() => {
          elRect = undefined;
          if (selectedAnnoteEl) {
            selectCodeLines(selectedAnnoteEl);
          }
        }, 10)
      );
      function throttle(fn, ms) {
      let throttle = false;
      let timer;
        return (...args) => {
          if(!throttle) { // first call gets through
              fn.apply(this, args);
              throttle = true;
          } else { // all the others get throttled
              if(timer) clearTimeout(timer); // cancel #2
              timer = setTimeout(() => {
                fn.apply(this, args);
                timer = throttle = false;
              }, ms);
          }
        };
      }
        // Attach click handler to the DT
        const annoteDls = window.document.querySelectorAll('dt[data-target-cell]');
        for (const annoteDlNode of annoteDls) {
          annoteDlNode.addEventListener('click', (event) => {
            const clickedEl = event.target;
            if (clickedEl !== selectedAnnoteEl) {
              unselectCodeLines();
              const activeEl = window.document.querySelector('dt[data-target-cell].code-annotation-active');
              if (activeEl) {
                activeEl.classList.remove('code-annotation-active');
              }
              selectCodeLines(clickedEl);
              clickedEl.classList.add('code-annotation-active');
            } else {
              // Unselect the line
              unselectCodeLines();
              clickedEl.classList.remove('code-annotation-active');
            }
          });
        }
    const findCites = (el) => {
      const parentEl = el.parentElement;
      if (parentEl) {
        const cites = parentEl.dataset.cites;
        if (cites) {
          return {
            el,
            cites: cites.split(' ')
          };
        } else {
          return findCites(el.parentElement)
        }
      } else {
        return undefined;
      }
    };
    var bibliorefs = window.document.querySelectorAll('a[role="doc-biblioref"]');
    for (var i=0; i<bibliorefs.length; i++) {
      const ref = bibliorefs[i];
      const citeInfo = findCites(ref);
      if (citeInfo) {
        tippyHover(citeInfo.el, function() {
          var popup = window.document.createElement('div');
          citeInfo.cites.forEach(function(cite) {
            var citeDiv = window.document.createElement('div');
            citeDiv.classList.add('hanging-indent');
            citeDiv.classList.add('csl-entry');
            var biblioDiv = window.document.getElementById('ref-' + cite);
            if (biblioDiv) {
              citeDiv.innerHTML = biblioDiv.innerHTML;
            }
            popup.appendChild(citeDiv);
          });
          return popup.innerHTML;
        });
      }
    }
  });
  </script>
</div> <!-- /content -->




</body></html>